एकदा दधिविमाथकारिणीं मातरं समुपसेदिवान् भवान् ।
स्तन्यलोलुपतया निवारयन्नङ्कमेत्य पपिवान् पयोधरौ ॥१॥
एकदा	once
दधि-विमाथ-कारिणीं	the curd churning as she was
मातरं	Thy mother
समुपसेदिवान् भवान्	approached Thou
स्तन्य-लोलुपतया	breast milk desiring
निवारयन्-	obstructing (the churning)
अङ्कम्-एत्य	up (her) lap climbing
पपिवान् पयोधरौ	(Thou) sucked her breasts
Once when Thy mother was churning the curd, Thou approached her in the eagerness to be breast fed. Obstructing her churning Thou climbed up her lap and sucked at her breasts.
अर्धपीतकुचकुड्मले त्वयि स्निग्धहासमधुराननाम्बुजे ।
दुग्धमीश दहने परिस्रुतं धर्तुमाशु जननी जगाम ते ॥२॥
अर्धपीत-	having half drunk
कुचकुड्मले	the breasts lotus bud like
त्वयि स्निग्ध-हास-	(when) Thee with a charming smile
मधुर-आनन-अम्बुजे	on the sweet face, lotus like
दुग्धम्-ईश	the milk, O Lord!
दहने परिस्रुतं	on the fire, having overflown
धर्तुम्-आशु	to hold it, fast
जननी जगाम ते	mother went away, Thy
O Lord! Thou had half-way sucked her lotus bud like breasts, with a charming smile playing on the sweet lotus like face. Just then, Thy mother went away in a haste to quickly hold the milk which had overflown on the fire.
सामिपीतरसभङ्गसङ्गतक्रोधभारपरिभूतचेतसा।
मन्थदण्डमुपगृह्य पाटितं हन्त देव दधिभाजनं त्वया ॥३॥
सामि-पीत-	half drunk, (so)
रस-भङ्ग-सङ्गत-	the joy being interrupted, as a result
क्रोध-भार-	angered greatly
परिभूत-चेतसा	with the mind overcome
मन्थ-दण्डम्-	the churning rod
उपगृह्य पाटितं	taking up, was broken
हन्त देव	Oh! O Lord!
दधि-भाजनम् त्वया	the curd pot by Thee
O Lord! Having drunk half way, and as a result the joy being interrupted, Thy mind was overcome with great rage. Oh! Then taking up the churning rod, the curd pot was broken by Thee.
उच्चलद्ध्वनितमुच्चकैस्तदा सन्निशम्य जननी समाद्रुता ।
त्वद्यशोविसरवद्ददर्श सा सद्य एव दधि विस्तृतं क्षितौ ॥४॥
उच्चलत्-ध्वनितम्-	by the loud sound
उच्चकै:-तदा	rising high then
सन्निशम्य	hearing
जननी समाद्रुता	Thy mother hastily came running
त्वत्-यश:-विसर:-	Thy fame spreading
वत्-ददर्श सा	as though, she saw
सद्य एव दधि	right then the curd
विस्तृतं क्षितौ	spreading on the floor
Thy mother came running when she heard the loud sound rising of the pot being broken. Right then she saw the curd spreading on the floor,even like Thy pure unblemished fame spreading in the universe.
वेदमार्गपरिमार्गितं रुषा त्वमवीक्ष्य परिमार्गयन्त्यसौ ।
सन्ददर्श सुकृतिन्युलूखले दीयमाननवनीतमोतवे ॥५॥
वेदमार्ग-परिमार्गितं	through the path of the Vedas, sought after
रुषा त्वाम्-अवीक्ष्य	the angered (Yashodaa), Thee not seeing
परिमार्गयन्ती-	searching (Thee)
असौ सन्ददर्श	she saw
सुकृतिनी-	the fortunate one (Yashodaa)
उलूखले	(Thee) on the mortar
दीयमान-नवनीतम्-	giving butter
ओतवे	to the cat
Thou who are sought after through the path of the Vedas, were not seen anywhere by Thy angered mother. She, the fortunate one searched everywhere and saw Thee sitting on the mortar feeding butter to the cat.
त्वां प्रगृह्य बत भीतिभावनाभासुराननसरोजमाशु सा ।
रोषरूषितमुखी सखीपुरो बन्धनाय रशनामुपाददे ॥६॥
त्वां प्रगृह्य बत	Thee getting hold of, Oh!
भीति-भावना-	by the expression of fear
भासुर-आनन-सरोजम्-	the shining face which was lotus like
आशु सा	hastily she
रोष-रूषित-मुखी	quivering with anger faced (she)
सखी-पुर:	in front of her friends
बन्धनाय	to tie up Thee
रशनाम्-उपाददे	a rope took
Oh! Yashodaa with her face quivering due to anger, hastily caught hold of Thee whose lotus like face was looking very sweet with pretended fear. As her friends watched, she took a rope to tie Thee up.
बन्धुमिच्छति यमेव सज्जनस्तं भवन्तमयि बन्धुमिच्छती ।
सा नियुज्य रशनागुणान् बहून् द्व्यङ्गुलोनमखिलं किलैक्षत ॥७॥
बन्धुम्-इच्छति	as a friend,(who is) desired
यम्-एव सज्जन:-	him alone , good people
तं भवन्तम्-अयि	That Thee O Lord!
बन्धुम्-इच्छती	to tie desiring
सा नियुज्य	she using (tying together)
रशना-गुणान् बहून्	pieces of rope, many
द्व्यङ्गुल-ऊनम्-	by two fingers (long), short
अखिलं	the whole length
किल-ऐक्षत	indeed found
All good men want to bind themselves to Thee alone in devotion. That Thou O Lord! Yashodaa desiring to tie, found the length of the rope short by two fingers, even though she attached many pieces of ropes to lengthen it.
विस्मितोत्स्मितसखीजनेक्षितां स्विन्नसन्नवपुषं निरीक्ष्य ताम् ।
नित्यमुक्तवपुरप्यहो हरे बन्धमेव कृपयाऽन्वमन्यथा: ॥८॥
विस्मित्-उत्स्मित-	wonderstruck and smiling
सखीजन-ईक्षितां	the friends (Gopis) watching
स्विन्न-सन्न-वपुषं	(she, with) perspiring and exhausted body
निरीक्ष्य ताम्	seeing her (Yashodaa)
नित्य-मुक्त-वपु:-	forever free bodied
अपि-अहो हरे	though O Hari! (Thou)
बन्धम्-एव	bondage alone
कृपया-अन्वमन्यथा:	compassionately accepted
As Thy mother's friends were smilingly watching with wonder, Thou saw her body perspiring and exhausted due to the effort. O Hari! Thou who are the ever-free Being, out of compassion accepted the bondage.
स्थीयतां चिरमुलूखले खलेत्यागता भवनमेव सा यदा।
प्रागुलूखलबिलान्तरे तदा सर्पिरर्पितमदन्नवास्थिथा: ॥९॥
स्थीयतां	(may you) stay here
चिरम्-उलूखले	for long at the mortar
खल-इति-	O rouge, thus (saying)
आगता भवनम्-एव	(when she) returned to the house only
सा यदा प्राक्-	she when, earlier
उलूखल-बिलान्तरे	in the mortar's cavity
तदा सर्पि:-अर्पितम्-	then, the butter which was placed
अदन्-अवास्थिथा:	eating Thou stayed
As Yashodaa went back into the house, she said 'O Rogue! stay tied like this to the mortar for long.' Thou stayed there eating the butter which Thou had earlier placed in the cavity of the mortar.
यद्यपाशसुगमो विभो भवान् संयत: किमु सपाशयाऽनया ।
एवमादि दिविजैरभिष्टुतो वातनाथ परिपाहि मां गदात् ॥१०॥
यदि-अपाश-सुगम:	if (Thou are) to the desire less easily attainable
विभो भवान्	O All pervading Being! Thou
संयत: किमु	were tied down, how come
सपाशया-अनया	(who was) having a rope, by her (Yashodaa)
एवम्-आदि	thus and so forth
दिविजै:-अभिष्टुत:	by the gods in heaven praised
वातनाथ	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
परिपाहि मां गदात्	save me from my ailments.
O All Pervading Being! If Thou are easily attainable to the desire less (a-paash) people, who are not bound by desire, how was it that Yashodaa was able to secure Thee with a (paash) rope for binding. Thou whose glories were thus sung by the gods in the heaven, O Lord of Guruvaayur! May Thou save me from my ailments.